https://do7js0tdxrds1.cloudfront.net/rzttbx7bylj6w9hf14gmxtn0aw5n?response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3D%22connection-i2c-arduino.jpg%22%3B&response-content-type=image%2Fjpeg&Expires=1701171660&Signature=iaVu9ow-9mSXLvZmY2Tj4N3As55Bnv-jusYUP3c3Tysii7N0G5uS-CwWz8r79mUmrSCirzUc4Gyy7EaHUSrtGbBBB~O4ey4jGokYGuoA5yLabo8BwRn1VmIvbZv-WqCGsGwIV7zEb-YvUpUdAF-R7t7aluAWrs~ilvw6sKTJP4sW2673vBrw1WCkXc5tRcuklBou7fM61sOJ9OFoSev~AhntxuBGbA9TfpRL8v4K2l2h55B216F0UbuNtkLbNOuP137VROjxtUDwj-HsZO4KKpk-NX09jTe6PXSlWJIg3XhMs0TOh3yjOZJXKEH~2wi4GoogqHpZUQaX53G9puGkPg__&Key-Pair-Id=K2Q3HDJ6ZAQGFF
Caption: Basic description of arduinos in a I2c Master slave Bus


https://do7js0tdxrds1.cloudfront.net/8yjhyelddxf389bj2pab83jbb8mm?response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3D%22L7+wiring.png%22%3B&response-content-type=image%2Fpng&Expires=1701171660&Signature=sa0SsxMgn~FuKCx86Mjuoh2i4XQsC7S2AGFAmjVXHnbazDYdxl9z0KQi9VzqeEddZu0bBbMWzabDJt9aYOEppFrgL9CjPJEKwpU0rKc3hIH-V3S3t1gt1wdIzCf6ynp9C8fBuYvHR6dJAcp-z1sdhJsydEGSZkFYjQJ-pbGo6ojCPSN0CgpOldSGOpS2Gev-fPIZxQM3eFYMKNQK88W1utLVpVwU7PIl44ewS7jXP5~V3RY1i2385fTTWggT4MmvgNq8Ye2Pn-sDpvLhtuuPjMDJk~E6kBbqKKb0gds9sABMnMYuUGr5-~OM6eRpi8WBg8QYwV2Jn7ny3a8IQwtklQ__&Key-Pair-Id=K2Q3HDJ6ZAQGFF

------

>Reader is the arduino connected to the motor controller circuit.

>Writer is the arduino connected to the Battery monitoring circuit.

The I2C protocol involves using two lines to send and receive data: a serial clock pin (SCL) where the Arduino writer board pulses at a regular interval, and a serial data pin (SDA) over which data is sent between the two devices.

As the clock line changes from low to high, a single bit of information will form the address of a specific device, and a command or data is transferred from the board to the I2C device over the SDA line. When this information is sent, the called upon device executes the request and transmits its data back, if required, to the board over the same line using the clock signal still generated by the writer on SCL.

-------

At the moment of making the connections, we need to remember that this protocol has two dedicated lines SCL (clock) and SDA (data) so we need to make sure to connect the SCL pin, of one of the boards, with the SCL of the other one. The same goes for the SDA as it is shown in the above image.

SDA is the Serial Data line.  The master and slave devices send and receive data over this wire.

SCL is the Serial Clock line. It carries the clock signal generated by the master.

Like other similar protocols, I2C is a serial communication protocol. I2C data is transferred bit by bit along a single SDA wire.  It is also synchronous, which means the output of bits is synchronized using the SCL clock signal generated by the master. 

>The clock signal is always controlled by the master, never the slave(s).