There are many types of brushless motors. The single-phase and three-phase BLDC motors/PMSMs are the most widely used.

Both the BLDC motors and the PMSMs work on the principle of a synchronous motor. As commutation in the stator phases creates a revolving magnetic field, the rotor magnetic poles try to catch up to synchronize, thus starting the motor action. The rotor continues to pursue the stator at every commutation, so the motor continuously moves.

> Let's watch this video from “Learn engineering” to understand Synchronous motors better.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vk2jDXxZIhs

The BLDC BEMF response is trapezoidal. This means that a different control waveform is required to control each of these motor types because the control should match the motor type. The figure above compares the waveforms for the two types.

Compared to BLDC, PMSM motors are wound in a sinusoidal fashion, resulting in a sinusoidal BEMF signature (resembling three sine waves phased 120 degrees apart. As shown in Fig. 1 in the previous lesson), to maximize performance, these motors generally use sinewave commutation.

The sinusoidal waves in PMSM motors are controlled by Field-oriented Control.

## Field-oriented control or FOC
	
In order to achieve the sinusoidal waveform to control the PMSM motor, it requires a Field-Oriented control (FOC) algorithm. FOC, or vector control, is a technique for variable frequency control of the stator in a three-phase motor using two orthogonal components. 

The first orthogonal component defines the magnetic flux generated by the stator, while the other corresponds to the torque as defined by the speed of the motor determined by the rotor position.

FOC is usually used to increase the efficiency of PMSM (three-phase) motors, which operate in sinusoidal mode. In sinusoidal commutation, all three wires are permanently energized with a sinusoidal current that is 120 degrees apart on each phase. This creates a north-south magnetic field that rotates inside the motor cage. 

>The FOC algorithm requires the motor position and speed for calculation.

The sinusoidal controller for the PMSM is more complex, so it’s costlier than the BLDC trapezoidal controller. This increased cost does come with some advantages, such as lower noise and less harmonics in the current waveform. 

However, the main advantage of the BLDC is that it’s easier to control. The choice of which motor is best to use depends on the application. It’s possible to use either kind of commutation with either type of motor. 

> Note: A BLDC motor will likely always perform better with a six-step trapezoidal algorithm, whereas a PMSM will perform better with sine wave commutation algorithms