In the previous chapter, we learned about the most primitive type of motor and how it works. Here we will look at the different types of motors present and how they differ from a DC brushed motor.

### DC Motors
The motor explained in the previous chapter was an example of a DC motor. In simple terms, a  DC motor is a motor that runs on a direct current. It will not run on alternating current, i.e the current coming out of your household plugs. 

Before we get into the types of DC motors, let's first understand the terminology.


https://do7js0tdxrds1.cloudfront.net/t0a78a5ju4ds4hafy568h6pjd4lp?response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3D%22AC+%282%29.png%22%3B&response-content-type=image%2Fpng&Expires=1701079257&Signature=bcSBO~XcxNvvK3uEyVKfqnapEXfXEzuafgRmXuMmlMXT7V~tK2GSnRVNEpr6BcVknxgdUqES5vclrCdHKY~OWf7LOjIUYGMOEpEoCvGqbBobfN9jezhnW51U-JAQjpOLyftB4VlPnplN2Vyx0rmyhueaXWdy7zvWEJJH1IbPEPkhp-ISbu0h1g6nTIGZ0OjvWZy0f3nNtX1OfV7q5f0NDRtcv2BC77H8o4HdeKpYrgVVNl2iXInZDQXA9ZFRXzl1I97p1xBzc~rt-Wj~lB0ZBzPsBubXqssyDkEPuKiIJQkA9fe8P06xVS4PPuE74v8vHRXJPUr0iTfmIIdkF0gz6Q__&Key-Pair-Id=K2Q3HDJ6ZAQGFF


Caption: The main parts of an AC electric motor

## Motor Terminology

### 1. Rotor 
The rotor is a general term for the main spinning part of an electrical machine and derived from the word ‘’rotating’’. Sometimes ‘’shaft’’ and ‘’armature’’ are alternatively used too. It’s the part of the machine on which electromechanical energy conversion occurs.

### 2. Stator
The stator is the static part of the motor. The main function of the stator is to generate the rotating magnetic field. The stator frame, stator core and stator winding are the three parts of the stator. The field coils are found on the stator of the motor.

### 3. Copper windings or Field coil
A field coil is a coil wound around a pole, and is used to generate a magnetic field in a motor or generator. It consists of a insulated coil of wire through which a current flows.


### 4. Commutator
A commutator is a rotary electrical switch in certain types of electric motors and electrical generators that periodically reverses the current direction between the rotor and the external circuit.

### 5. Poles
A pole is north or south magnetic field of force that is generated by a permanent magnet or current passing through a coil of wire (i.e. an electromagnet).

https://do7js0tdxrds1.cloudfront.net/p7uf0vfrku7qttlgtxv8gfvtkc9d?response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3D%22AC+%285%29.png%22%3B&response-content-type=image%2Fpng&Expires=1701079257&Signature=eJDvFZJx0vywjP24S~VVc-UBm5GYDAkfZF7NAkv8~I57MXWgv~cH5ox31qxccPoxF-UTHydpEwVj2v2ND~cN2BYQ4w--s7Zytq71b2HSsoT09O15C1134DGhXUrQy7FrEthmPOEwhKo6w7Metm9HcnY6PPBPxXT7hGfTdavAYo26njQkhLCCp6crjRTiR9tcqpiuo-2EgFZtBRYeeyyvI1wlzv9knO0BlqQpfWDyrpRgKQvu~CXfeFGT2ShX74TafNDts2HAXWeTWvQGKoOgIaKCObH2H9ZrY9kgA6L6VW9Z8lZ5zwDm2XBjW3E8rn83Lh6s-qqvudaRqe01CCGOrA__&Key-Pair-Id=K2Q3HDJ6ZAQGFF

Caption: Parts of a BLDC motor

https://do7js0tdxrds1.cloudfront.net/ihbl3dax0cb4rgeeu1v9z41i2z9u?response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3D%22Types+of+motors.png%22%3B&response-content-type=image%2Fpng&Expires=1701079257&Signature=RZ-gXCtkiSsU17xOx0jBRJIl9AzCvhGdeN4PZR9~Dnj5RJecWUZ-aiPD55Juw5bK-A-x--y~DYStAfd01WkDtHSZbUAAk3byvBKEC0gUi89ReASE6CUm1ChbreuhnySYHN5HkrajJcsWLbqpMG5fNY2wpsraz8AK16BqdhJuJ91rQQYO9O1MPm~94xaK69hhPpU1XuYPPsMHLVyPJDFiBqzZiv5SMghnoQk9GuWcNHcC2U9FO1eV8qyPS6EUknMXQH2bwuzxFKzc3X0MsekeBlFAe7iGFq9FKunfwhoKpG-FPdDXMBK5UC3slEU~1JDkLUKy7PP2eUtT~tbey1rZAg__&Key-Pair-Id=K2Q3HDJ6ZAQGFF

### The two common types are:

### **1. Brushed**

These are the more traditional type of motor and are typically used in cost-sensitive applications, where the control system is relatively simple, such as in consumer applications and more basic industrial equipment, these types of motors can be broken down as:

* Series Wound –  this type of motor offers poor speed control and as the torque to the motor increase, then the speed falls. Applications include automotive, hoists, lifts, and cranes as it has a high starting torque.

* Shunt Wound –  It has a medium level of starting torque with constant speed, so it's suitable for applications including lathes, vacuum cleaners, conveyors & grinders.

* Compound Wound – This is a cumulative of Series and Shunt, where the polarity of the shunt winding is such that it adds to the series fields. This type has a high starting torque and can run smoothly if the load varies slightly, it's used for driving compressors, variable-head centrifugal pumps, rotary presses, circular saws, shearing machines, elevators and continuous conveyors.

* Permanent Magnet – As the name suggests instead of an electromagnet, a permanent magnet is used in the rotors and are used in applications where precise control and low torque, such as in robotics, servo systems.

---
### 2. Brushless DC motors

Brushless motors alleviate some of the issues associated with the more common brushed motors (short life span for high use applications) and are mechanically much simpler in design (not having brushes). The motor controller uses Hall Effect sensors to detect the rotor's position, using this the controller can accurately control the motor via current in the rotor coils to regulate the speed. The advantages of this technology are long life, little maintenance, and high efficiency (85-90%), whereas the disadvantages are higher initial costs and more complicated controllers. These types of motors are generally used in speed and positional control with applications where reliability and ruggedness are required, such as in electric vehicles.

Brushless DC motors provide high power in a small package.

Caption: Types of motors

<!-- There is a video link after this text on the LMS -->
https://vimeo.com/617911907

#### BLDC Motor advantages being:

* Easy installation
* Speed control over a wide range
* Quick starting, stopping, reversing, and acceleration
* High starting torque
* Linear speed-torque curve
* DC motors are widely used and can be found in small tools and appliances, through to electric vehicles, lifts & hoists

*An example of a Brushless DC motor is a stepper motor.*

A stepper motor, also known as step motor or stepping motor, is a brushless DC electric motor that divides a full rotation into a number of equal steps. The motor's position can then be commanded to move and hold at one of these steps without any position sensor.

These motors are mainly used in robotics and other numerically controlled applications where precision is expected. 

>Going forward, we will be concentrating more towards BLDC or Brushless DC motors and learn their control mechanisms, as they are often used in Electric 2 wheelers. 

---
## AC Motors

While both AC and DC motors serve the same function of converting electrical energy into mechanical energy, they are powered, constructed, and controlled differently. The most basic difference is the power source. AC motors are powered from Alternating Current (AC) while DC motors are powered from Direct Current (DC), such as batteries.

AC motors are highly flexible in many features including speed control and have a much larger installed base compared to DC motors. Some of it's key advantages are:

* Low power demand on start
* Controlled acceleration
* Adjustable operational speed
* Controlled starting current
* Adjustable torque limit

### Types of AC motor include:

#### 1. Synchronous
In this type of motor, the rotation of the rotor is synchronized with the frequency of the supply current and the speed remains constant under varying loads. So it's ideal for driving equipment at a constant speed and is used in high precision positioning devices like robots, instrumentation, machines, and process control.


#### 2. Induction (Asynchronous)
This type of motor uses electromagnetic induction from the magnetic field of the stator winding to produce an electric current in the rotor and hence torque. These are the most common type of AC motors and are important to the industry due to their load capacity, with single-phase induction motors being used mainly for smaller loads, for example in household appliances whereas, three-phase induction motors are used more in industrial applications including compressors, pumps, conveyor systems, and lifting gear.

-----------

### There is another type of motor, known as the switched reluctance motor.

The switched reluctance motor (SRM) is an electric motor that runs by reluctance torque. Unlike common brushed DC motor types, power is delivered to windings in the stator (case) rather than the rotor. This greatly simplifies mechanical design as power does not have to be delivered to a moving part.

Switched reluctance motors operate by switching currents in the stator windings in response to changes in the magnetic circuit formed by the rotor and stator. 

The stator of a switched reluctance motor contains windings, similar to a brushless DC motor, but the rotor is simply made of steel that is shaped into salient poles, with no windings or magnets.

Because switched reluctance motors have rotors with no magnets or windings, they have lower inertia and can therefore achieve higher accelerations and speeds than motors with permanent magnet rotors, such as stepper motors. The lack of magnets on the rotor provides other benefits as well including the ability to withstand higher temperatures (less cooling required) and simple, lower-cost construction than permanent magnet motors.


We will learn more about these motors and will have a thorough comparison between these motors during the motor selection chapter.

# Further Resources

<!-- There is a video link after this text on the LMS -->
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CWulQ1ZSE3c

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YdfhQvkqjBo

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GQatiB-JHdI

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=59HBoIXzX_c