https://do7js0tdxrds1.cloudfront.net/h8grc7pkb53r0g50td72zm2fh63v?response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3D%22bms+functionalities.png%22%3B&response-content-type=image%2Fpng&Expires=1701255353&Signature=XiDd4jVI3KDOeglfEVCpiZULDduxQBzKgfU2tEx13Y66a4Y8LzsucpYO4nf~6TuKiL8yKWhlHzn-J9R9cQcXBqDIAgwbIR6NQVTMwYy46ECkLYbj9vEJvCu0MSO1ubcHOqho-PDI23nyYe6JHIANT5SIZC5nQ~6fXfu6A3OEfM96cP5njbnL08~v49xcV-Fovib3ZxSj9RrCBkKzWfGS3SYZH5XDn4CdXBTSH7rP9HQ-Xr0dzgjqC~HT8jmX0zFJnZ4IIFRcV1mbOeViVlN0i62vlLAsGDVBsnBg9d98rHW3HJhWJbjmf4s~xiaAZerx61tRkFm-QKUwD7DNOiFoBA__&Key-Pair-Id=K2Q3HDJ6ZAQGFF

Caption: Functionalities of a BMS

Moving on to Level 6, we learned all the different types of battery management systems available and understood what they do.

But for this recap, we will only be focussing on the Centralized BMS module.

In centralized battery management systems, the entire functionality is integrated into a single module, which is connected to the batteries or battery cells via several wires.

The main objective of a Battery management system is to balance all the cells in a battery pack to the same voltage.

There are 2 different balancing algorithms utilized by BMS systems. These are

1. Passive Balancing
Passive balancing drains charge from cells having too much charge and dissipates drained energy as heat.


2. Active Balancing
In Active balancing, unlike passive balancing where cells with a higher charge than normal are discharged by connecting them to resistance and discharging their extra charge by generating heat. Active balancers transfer the extra charge from overcharged cells to undercharged cells, and thus there is no energy wasted.


We will have a more in-depth look into passive balancing as that is the most used. 

There are 2 different ways of passive balancing:

**1. Fixed Shunt Resistor** 

In this particular balancing method, the general idea is that a resistor is placed in parallel with each cell, and used to drain charge from that cell. The energy removed from the cell is dissipated as heat.

**2. Switched Shunt Resistor** 

This is a variation of fixed shunt resistor design, where the Zener diode circuit is replaced with a microcontroller controlled switch

### Drawbacks of passive balancing

The drawbacks of passive balancing are:

1. Energy is wasted as heat, which could be otherwise used
productively.

2. The quantity of heat generated by balancing can be comparable
to the heat generated by normal cell operation. This may also increase the cooling requirements for the battery-pack thermal management system, which is a significant expense.

3. Battery pack life could be shorter with respect to a pack with an
active balancing design.
   * Pack life is determined by the weakest cell in the pack.
   * The active balancing can use strong cells to support weak cells,
bringing the pack to a uniform end-of-life configuration.

If you require a more detailed recap, we highly recommend going over Level 6 again.